So far, we have built a syntax analyzer of a compiler and generated a symbol table with tokens
encountered in a given c code. Now, we will perform semantic analysis on our code to detect any
semantic errors.
2 Tasks
In this assignment , you have to perform the following tasks:
• Type Checking: You have to perform different types of type checking in this part.
You have to perform the following semantic checks:
1. Generate error message if operands of an assignment operator are not consistent with
each other. Note that, the second operand of the assignment operator will be an
expression that may contain numbers, variables, function calls, etc.
2. Generate an error message if the index of an array is not an integer.
3. Both the operands of the modulus operator should be integers
4. Second operator of modulus and division should not be 0.
5. During a function call all the arguments should be consistent with the function definition.
6. A void function cannot be called as a part of an expression.
• Type Conversion:
You have to perform some type-conversion. For example,
1. you have to generate error/warning message if floating point number is assigned to an
integer type variable.
2. Also, the result of RELOP and LOGICOP operation should be an integer.
• Uniqueness Checking:
1. You should check whether a variable used in an expression is declared or not.
2. Check whether there are multiple declarations of variables with the same ID in the same
scope.
• Array Index:
1. You have to check whether there is an index used with array and vice versa.
• Function Parameter:
1. Check whether a function is called with appropriate number of parameters with
appropriate types.
2. A function call cannot be made with non-function type identifier. You have already added
necessary info function name symbols in the previous assignment. You can use that.
4 Input
The input will be a file with .c extension containing a c source program. File name will be given
from the command line.
5 Output
In this assignment, there will be two output files. The output file should be named as
<Your_student_ID>_log.txt and <Your_student_ID>_error.txt.
The log file will contain matching grammar rules, and corresponding segment of source
code as the previous assignment. Print the line count and the error count at the end of the log
file. Print the error count at the end of the error file.
The error file will contain all error/warning messages encountered while compiling the code.
Please make sure not to give errors in multiple lines for one error in an expression.
Please note that your code should not stop working if one error is encountered. Rather, compile
till the end of the given c code and capture all errors in the code.
For more clarification about input-output check the supplied sample I/O files given in the lab
folder. You are highly encouraged to produce output exactly like the sample one.